The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scientiﬁc Article Search System

Based on Discourse Facet Representation

Yuta Kobayashi,1 Hiroyuki Shindo,1,2 Yuji Matsumoto1,2

1Nara Institute of Science and Technology

2RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)

{kobayashi.yuta.kp1, shindo, matsu}@is.naist.jp

Abstract

We present a browser-based scientiﬁc article search system
with graphical visualization. This system is based on triples
of distributed representations of articles, each triple repre-
senting a scientiﬁc discourse facet (Objective, Method, or Re-
sult) using both text and citation information. Because each
facet of an article is encoded as a separate vector, the sim-
ilarity between articles can be measured by considering the
articles not only in their entirety but also on a facet-by-facet
basis. Our system provides three search options: a similarity
ranking search, a citation graph with facet-labeled edges, and
a scatter plot visualization with facets as the axes.

Introduction

Finding relevant articles can be a challenge for scientists,
because they are faced with a ﬂood of digital publications.
Therefore, there has been increasing interest in applying
natural language processing technologies to scholarly doc-
ument analysis. In search systems of scientiﬁc articles such
as the ACL Anthology Searchbench1 (Sch¨afer et al. 2011),
once a search has been performed, the only option for ex-
panding it is a citation browser that displays a citation graph.
One technology that can be used for expanding a search
is discourse structure analysis of scientiﬁc literature (Teufel,
Siddharthan, and Tidhar 2006), which seeks to automatically
classify the body texts and citation contexts by their scien-
tiﬁc discourse facets. Previous studies have identiﬁed com-
mon discourse facets in scientiﬁc articles, of which we focus
on three: Objective, Method, and Result. If a system can rec-
ognize the discourse facets of articles, the similarity between
articles can be measured not only based on their full text
but also on a facet-by-facet basis. In literature retrieval sys-
tems, this opens the possibility for answering queries such
as: “ﬁnd an article with a different objective than the one
at hand but with a similar methodology”; It is probable that
such queries cannot be answered by a mere keyword search.
As the ﬁrst step toward our goal, we focus on the steps
after selecting an anchor article and provide three faceted
search options: a similarity ranking search, a facet-labeled
citation graph, and a scatter plot visualization. These search
Copyright c(cid:13) 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1http://aclasb.dfki.de

Figure 1: Facet-based article similarity calculation

options are based on vector representations that encode not
the full article, but each individual discourse facet. Our sys-
tem enables users to search for scientiﬁc articles based on
the similarity of discourse facets (Objective, Method, and
Result), represented by multi-vector representations of both
the text and citation graphs (Figs.1 and 2).

Steps for Building Article Facet Vectors

Step 1: Preprocessing dataset We crawled PDF ﬁles
from the ACL Anthology and built a retrieval dataset. The
body text was extracted from the PDFs as XHTML by our
customized Poppler, and some collapsed articles were elim-
inated. To build the citation graph, we extract citations from
the XHTML using regular expressions. This preprocessing
resulted in 20,796 articles and 303,767 citation links. Next,
we carried out unsupervised learning of the word vector rep-
resentations using fastText (Bojanowski et al. 2016) with the
original corpus composed of the text in English Wikipedia
and the ACL Anthology.

Step 2: Section facet classiﬁcation and learning facet vec-
tors We classiﬁed sections of the articles using an annota-
tion dataset for structured abstracts, which are summaries
of articles comprising labeled sections for rapid compre-
hension. We used the National Library of Medicine Cate-
gory Mappings ﬁle2, a dataset attached to the medical ar-
ticle database MEDLINE. The ﬁle contains a list of 3,032
translation rules for canonicalizing various section titles ap-
pearing in structured abstracts into one of the facets. First,

2https://structuredabstracts.nlm.nih.gov/

9859

we applied these rules to the section titles of the articles to
obtain the facets of these sections. To simplify the model, we
merged the original labels into three broad labels by follow-
ing the categorization. If none of the rules applied to a sec-
tion title, the corresponding section was labeled by the clas-
siﬁer fastText trained on the sections labeled by the rules.

We estimated the discourse facets of the unlabeled sec-
tions using a classiﬁer, which received as input the body text
of a section and output a section facet (Objective, Method,
or Result). For each article, the sections corresponding to
each facet were represented by 100-dimensional vectors. If
more than one section corresponded to a facet, the vectors
of those sections were averaged. Each article was assigned a
300-dimensional vector by concatenating its three facet vec-
tors.

Step 3: Citation facet classiﬁcation and citation graph
augmentation In the next step, we augmented the citation
graph by adding a citation facet to each citation edge using a
supervised fastText classiﬁer (Fig.2). This citation facet was
determined by the textual context of the corresponding ci-
tation in the citing article. The edges were divided into the
following three facets: Objective, Method, and Result. We
used a dataset that included 1,618 citation contexts by com-
bining the Citation Function Corpus (Teufel, Siddharthan,
and Tidhar 2006) and CL-SciSumm-2017 SharedTask Cor-
pus (Jaidka, Jain, and Kan 2017). We chose several examples
from the combined dataset that could be classiﬁed into the
three types of facets. The input of the classiﬁer was a citation
context, and the output was one of the three facets.

Step 4: Update text-based vectors with citation graph
Using the graph to which citation facets were attached, an
update was created for each facet using the facet vectors ob-
tained in Step 2 as the initial values. Speciﬁcally, we used
the graph embedding method LINE (Tang et al. 2015) to in-
tegrate the text and graph information. For each vertex k and
a facet f, let vk,f denote the facet vector with vertex k rep-
resenting facet f. Updating the facet vectors was done by
maximizing the following objective function for each edge
(i, j) between vertices i and j on the citation graph:

log σ(cid:0)(cid:104)v(cid:48)

j,f , vi,f(cid:105)(cid:1) +

N(cid:88)

(cid:16)−(cid:104)v(cid:48)

n(k),f , vi,f(cid:105)(cid:17)

,

log σ

k=1

where f is the facet with edge (i, j) determined in Step 3,
σ(· ) is the sigmoid function, v(cid:48)
j,f is the context facet vector
representing the outlink from vertex j. N is the number of
“negative” vertex samples, and n(k) (k = 1, . . . , N ) are the
negative vertices chosen from among the vertices in the ci-
tation graph according to a noise distribution Pnoise (v), pro-
portional to the out-degree of vertex v. In this step, we only
updated the facet vectors corresponding to an edge’s cita-
tion facet. Therefore, the model optimizes each facet vector
to maximize the inner product of the facet vectors.

By following these procedures, we obtained the facet vec-
tors of the articles and used them for the search. Because the
search goal was different, it was difﬁcult to compare this
faceted search to the keyword-based literature search.

9860

Figure 2: Citation graph augmentation and facet vectors

Demonstration: Faceted Literature Search

Ranking search with discourse facet By inputting a
query, the system shows a list of articles matching the query.
After selecting an article as an anchor article, the user can
switch to a facet tab (Overall, Objective, Method, Result).
The system then displays a new ranking based on the cosine
similarity of the vectors of the chosen facet.

Citation graph based on citation facet By clicking on
the citation button, the system displays a visualization of the
citation graphs whose edges are color-coded according to
facet, allowing the user to trace citations and understand re-
search trends easily. The user can also adjust the number of
vertices using sliders for minimum similarity or minimum
degree. By clicking on a node, the user sees the emphasized
citation edges closely related to both the anchor paper and
the anchor paper’s bibliographic information.

Scatter plot of articles with facet axes By clicking the
view type button, users see a scatter plot based on t-SNE
and can select two elements from the four options (Overall,
Objective, Method, and Result) as the x- and y-axis. For ex-
ample, the x-axis could represent method similarity and the
y-axis objective similarity. This plot would help users to ﬁnd
articles using similar methods but different objectives.
Acknowledgments This work was partly supported by
JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR1513, Japan.

