Multiple Demographic Attributes

Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

Yiwen Jiang1,2,3, Wei Tang1,2,3, Neng Gao1,2, Ji Xiang2, Chenyang Tu1,2(B),

and Min Li1,2

1 State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Chinese Academy

2 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy

of Sciences, Beijing, China

{jiangyiwen,tangwei,gaoneng,xiangji,tuchenyang,minli}@iie.ac.cn

of Sciences, Beijing, China

3 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy

of Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract. Users’ real demographic attributes is impressively useful for
intelligent marketing, automatic advertising and human-computer inter-
action. Traditional method on attribute prediction make great eﬀort on
the study of social network data, but ignore massive volumes of disparate,
dynamic, and temporal data derived from ubiquitous mobile and sensor
devices. For example, daily walking step counts produced by pedometer.
Multiple demographic prediction on temporal data have two problems.
First one is that diﬀerential eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent time period data
for prediction is unclear. And another one is how to eﬀectively learn the
complementary correlations between diﬀerent attributes. To address the
above problem, we propose a novel model named Correlation-Aware Neu-
ral Embedding with Attention (CANEA), which ﬁrst directly separates
diﬀerent attribute oriented feature using separated embedding layer, and
use attention mechanism to assign a higher weight to dominant time
point. Then it captures informative correlations using correlation learn-
ing layer. Finally we obtain the reﬁned task-speciﬁc representations with
optimal correlation information for predicting certain attributes. Exper-
imental results show the eﬀectiveness of our method.

Keywords: Demographic prediction · Pedometer data · Correlation

learning

1 Introduction

Knowing users’ real demographic attributes is extremely signiﬁcant for the appli-
cations of intelligent marketing, automatic advertising and human-computer
interaction. Conventional applications of demographic prediction tend to pay
attention to users’ behavior in social networks, and few people pay attention to
mobile and sensor devices. However, sensor data for demographic prediction has
it’s own unique applications. For example, it’s hard to use online speech to infer
the age and gender of a person who rarely speaks on social networks, but it’s
c(cid:2) Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
H. W. Lauw et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2020, LNAI 12084, pp. 857–868, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-47426-3_66

858

Y. Jiang et al.

easier to infer such attribute via his or her pedometer records, as the walking
is a daily stable behavior. Besides, the attributes predicted through sensor data
could be directly used to enable human-computer interaction more humanized
and friendly in smart home system. For example, when a young lady go home
from outside, the air conditioning and audio could select a gender/age-aware
response (air conditioning temperature and music) from many possible candi-
dates to make the user more comfortable [10].

Most of earlier studies on attribute prediction are primarily involve analysis
of the user-generated public data on the network, especially logs, comments as
well as videos. They mostly come from Facebook [12], Twitters [2,13], microblogs
[17], YouTube [4], web search queries [6], social networking chats [11], and forum
posts [3]. And little work is put into the management of sensor data. Besides,
traditional demographic prediction model can not fully learn the complementary
correlations between diﬀerent attributes. Existing work usually infer users’ diﬀer-
ent attributes separately without taking account of correlation learning or infer
all the attributes together using shared embedding at the bottom of model. For
example, wang et al. [16] proposed a Structured Neural Embedding (SNE) model
that use shared embedding to leverages the potential correlations for multi-task
learning by concatenating structured label. However, the concatenated formal-
ization makes the prediction task more diﬃcult than separated tasks since the
output space for each task becomes much larger. Raehyun et al. [8] proposed an
Embedding Transformation Network (ETN) model that shares user representa-
tions at the bottom and converts them to task-speciﬁc representations using a
linear transformation. But this model does not take any steps to explicitly learn
the complementary relationship between diﬀerent task-speciﬁc features.

To tackle the above problem, we make eﬀort on the reasonable utilize of
pedometer data and go a further step to present a new model named Correlation-
Aware Neural Embedding with Attention (CANEA) for multiple demographic
attributes prediction. In CANEA, we ﬁrst leverage a separated embedding layer
with attention based on RNN branches to extract task-speciﬁc features, and
obtain explicit day weight for better prediction. Then, to well learn comple-
mentary correlations between diﬀerent tasks, we design a correlation learning
layer with full connection neural pipelines to capture correlation features. More-
over, we enhance the user representation with correlation features using bilinear
model. The ﬁnal user representations are fed into multi-task prediction layer for
multiple demographic attributes prediction.

We conduct extensive experiments on a real world pedometer dataset to
test our method. Several state-of-the-art baselines are taken into comparison.
And we also test our model in traditional application scenario of demographic
prediction on transaction data. The experimental results prove the eﬀectiveness
of our model. Overall, our contributions are as follows:

(1) We extend our sight to the ubiquitous mobile and sensor devices to bridge

the gap between pedometer data and users’ demographic attributes.

(2) A new model named Embedding Separation and Correlation Learning with
Attention (CANEA) is proposed for multiple demographic prediction, which
has strong ability to learn the complementary correlations between tasks.

Multiple Demographic Attributes Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

859

In addition, we explicitly analyze diﬀerent days’ eﬀect of pedometer records
on demographic prediction.

(3) Extensive experiments are conducted on a real world pedometer dataset as
well as a public transaction dataset, which all demonstrate the eﬀectiveness
of the proposed method.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the problem for-
malization of multi-task demographic prediction. Section 3 discusses our model
Architecture in detail, and Sect. 4 presents the experimental results and analysis.
And ﬁnally, in Sect. 5, we conclude our work and present future work.

2 Problem Formalization

In our application scenario, we aim to predict demographic attributes based on
pedometer data. Speciﬁcally, the proﬁle of each user is represented as a sequence
of daily step counts, which could be presented as follow:

S : [[s1], [s2], ..., [sn]]

where S denotes the pedometer record of a certain user, si is his/her step count
on the i-th day, and n is the total days.

Typically, our work is a multi-task prediction problem. Here, the attributes
we are interested in are gender and age, and the attributes can be various if nec-
essary in other applications. The values of gender are male and female regardless
of non-traditional gender, and the values of age include young, adult, middle age
and old [16]. Therefore, the prediction problem T could be summarized as:

T : S → {y1, y2, ...yt}

where yi is the attribute class of i-th task, and t is the total number of the
tasks. The objective of our work is to train an eﬀective end-to-end model to
simultaneously predict demographic attributes for new users.

Fig. 1. The architecture of CANEA.

860

Y. Jiang et al.

3 Model Architecture

In this section, we present the details of the CANEA. An overview of our frame-
work is illustrated in Fig. 1. We leverage separated embedding layer to extract
task-speciﬁc representations. And a correlation learning layer is used to learn
the hidden correlations between diﬀerent tasks. Finally, the multi-task predic-
tion layer make the prediction of all tasks simultaneously.

3.1 Separated Embedding Layer

We use separated embedding branches showed in Fig. 2 to learn task-speciﬁc
representations. Diﬀerent from mapping user proﬁles to a shared representation
at the bottom of model that ignores the interferences among multiple tasks,
the separated embedding branches eliminate these interferences and produce
a relatively pure task-speciﬁc representations directly. We have to admit that
shared embedding retain informative correlations among multiple attributes, and
separated embedding method seems to ignore these correlations. But this shared
embedding lacks explanations for correlation extraction. And in the next section,
we will introduce correlation learning layer to learn these correlations in a more
interpretable way.

Fig. 2. The architecture of separated embedding branches.

Considering that the pedometer data is a kind of temporal data, we adopt
the most popular sequence learning model of LSTM [5] as the backbone of each
embedding branches. In this paper, we assume that the contexts from both past
and future are useful and complementary to each other. Therefore we combine
forward (left to right) and backward (right to left) recurrent to build a bidirec-
tional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) [14]. Moreover, the stacked recurrent layers are used
to build a deep RNN model to enhance the representation ability of the sepa-
rated embedding layer. Here, we use a pairs of stacked bidirectional LSTM to
respectively learn age oriented and gender oriented representations.

Multiple Demographic Attributes Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

861

Note that the diﬀerent days in each week play diﬀerential roles in tasks.
For example, in our intuition, female are more likely to go shopping than male
on weekends. That means users’ step counts on weekend is more important
than weekday for gender inference. From this point of view, we adopt attention
mechanism [1] to give the signiﬁcant days higher scores. Thus, the separated
embedding branches could be presented as:

wi = sof tmax(tanh(vix + bi))

Ei = Lθi(wix)

where L is the trainable model of Bi-LSTM, θi is the trainable parameters of
embedding branches for i-th task, x is the input sequence, and Ei is the output
task-speciﬁc feature for i-th task. Additionally, vi and bi are trainable parame-
ters of the attention model in i-th branch, wi is the attention weights describing
the importance assigned to each element of the input.

3.2 Correlation Learning Layer

As we mentioned before, the separated embedding layer eliminate the interfer-
ences among multiple tasks, but the informative correlations between diﬀerent
tasks have been ignored. In this situation, we design a correlation learning layer
to learn hidden correlation features. The key components of this correlation
learning pipelines are a full connection network and a bilinear mixer (presented
in Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Architecture of the key component in correlation learning piplines.

862

Y. Jiang et al.

Full connection network are widely used in hidden representation learning on
account of their excellent learning ability and desirable scalability. The correla-
tion representation for i-th task is presented as:
Ci = Fφi(wi ¯Ei)

where F is the trainable model of full connection network, φi is the trainable
parameters, Ci represents correlation feature for i-th task, ¯Ei is the concatena-
tion of other task-speciﬁc features.

We combine the separation feature and correlation feature in a bilinear model.
The bilinear model is a two-factor model with mathematical property of sepa-
rability: their outputs are linear in either factor when the others held constant,
which has been demonstrated that the inﬂuences of two factors can be eﬃciently
separated and combined in a ﬂexible representation [15]. The combination func-
tion can be formulated as:

Mi = EiWiCi

where Wi is the tensor of trainable parameters, Ei denotes separation represen-
tation of i-th task , and Ci is the correlation representation for i-th task.

3.3 Multi-task Prediction Layer

With the separation representation and correlation representation obtained by
the previous two layers, we obtain the prediction probability for the demographic
attribute of a given user by:

p(yi|S) = sof tmax(OiMi)

where Mi is the mixed representation of user and Oi is the trainable parameter.
The parameter is responsible for converting the mixed representation for each
task into prediction through linear transformation.

The goal of demographic prediction is to infer all demographic attribute of
users from their pedometer proﬁles. For i-th task, we minimize the sum of the
negative log-likelihoods deﬁned as:

Lossi = − m(cid:2)

logp(yi,j|Sj)

j=1

where m is the total number of users. Sj and yi,j are the input of j-th user’s
daily step count sequence and his/her inferred attribute class of i-th task.

Combining all these task-speciﬁc losses, the total multi-task loss function is:

Loss =

t(cid:2)

i=1

λiLossi

where the hyper-parameter λ controls the trade-oﬀ between all of t task-speciﬁc
losses. Considering that all tasks are equal important in our experiments, we set
all λ to be 1.

Multiple Demographic Attributes Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

863

4 Experiments

In this section, we present the details of our experiments and analyze the eﬀec-
tiveness of our approach.

4.1 Dataset

We build a large-scale real world pedometer dataset came from WeChat, a
famous mobile application in China. WeChat develops a subfunction called
WeChat Sport that collects and ranks users’ as well as their net friends’ daily
step counts online based on the pedometers embedded in mobile phones, and we
crawl the data at the chance. Our dataset contains 39,246 users’ 300-days step
counts during the period from 2018.6.11 to 2019.4.6. All of the users are anno-
tated with gender and age. To guarantee the reliability of the data, we removed
those unsuitable users who have more than 150 days of zero step count records.
The distribution of users’ attributes are listed in Table 1. In experiment, we use
60% and 20% of the data for training and test, and leave the rest 20% as a
validation set for tuning.

Table 1. Distribution of users’ attributes.

Attributes Value

Users Distribution

Gender

Age

Male
Female

Young
Adult
Middle age
Old

22134 56%
17112 44%

8635 22%
19230 49%
7064 18%
4317 11%

4.2 Evaluation Metrics

We employ F-measure to evaluate our model. F1-measure is a widely used mea-
sure method as a complement for accuracy, and it is the most popular evalua-
tion metrics for demographic prediction. Speciﬁcally, F1 score is calculated as
the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Note that, in our experiment, we use
the weighted precision (wP ), recall (wR) and F1 (wF 1) score as the evaluation
metrics since we consider all classes to be equal important. The weighted F1 is
calculated as follows:

∗ weight)

∗ weight)

wP =

wR =

(cid:3)u

(cid:3)u

(cid:2)

y∈Y
(cid:2)

y∈Y

(

(

i=1 I(y
(cid:3)u

∗
i = ˆyi&y = ˆyi)

i=1 I(y = ˆyi)

i=1 I(y
(cid:3)u

∗
i = ˆyi&y = ˆyi)

i=1 I(y = y

∗
i )

864

Y. Jiang et al.

wF 1 = 2 × wP × wR

wP + wR

where I(·) is an indicator function, u denotes the total number of new users,
∗
Y is the set of all label combinations to be predicted, y
i denotes the ground
truth of attributes for the i-th new user, ˆyi denotes the predicted attributes, and
i=1 I(y = yi). The weighted F1 assigns a high weight to the large
weight = 1
u
classes to account for label imbalance.

(cid:3)u

4.3 Baseline Models

We compare our models with several baselines on demographic prediction. The
description of these baselines are listed below:

POP. POP is a naive method that always predicts the given sample as the
majority classes. In previous work [8,16], POP is used as a baseline model which
ignores characteristics of users.

JNE. Joint Neural Embedding [16] maps users’ all walking histories into latent
vectors. These vectors are processed by average pooling and then fed into a linear
prediction layer for each task.

SNE. Structured Neural Embedding [16] has similar structure with JNE. The
only diﬀerence between SNE and JNE is that the loss of SNE is computed via a
log-bilinear model with structured predictions.

ETN. Embedding Transformation Network [8] uses a shared embedding just as
SNE. The shared embedding is fed into an embedding transformation layer to
obtain the transformed representation. Then the transformed representation is
directly fed into the prediction layer.

ETNA. Embedding Transformation Network with Attention [8] is an improved
version of ETN. The transformed representation produced by embedding trans-
formed layer is fed to a task-speciﬁc attention layer to take into account the
importance of each element in users’ proﬁle.

4.4 Experimental Settings

Considering that the recurrent units maintain activation for each time-step which
have already make the network to be extremely deep, we use only one layer of
bidirectional RNN with 128 LSTM units in each separated embedding branch.
And the full connection networks in correlation learning layer is set to be the
shallow architectures using only 3 hidden layer with 256 sigmoid units. We use
random values drawn from the Gaussian distribution with 0 mean and 0.01
standard deviation to initialize the weight matrices in LSTM, full connected
layer, and prediction layer. Learning from [7], the forget gate bias are initialized
to be 5 to let the forget gate close to 1, namely no forgetting. Thus, long-range

Multiple Demographic Attributes Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

865

Table 2. Performance comparison of diﬀerent models.

Model name Results

wP

wR

wF1

0.354
0.643
0.648
0.679
0.688

0.513
0.726

0.198
0.626
0.631
0.656
0.660

0.137
0.609
0.615
0.634
0.641

POP [8]
JNE [16]
SNE [16]
ETN [8]
ETNA [8]
CANEAa
0.504
0.496
CANEAb
0.681
0.703
0.695 0.741 0.717
CANEA
aabandon correlation learning layer.
babandon attention mechanism.

dependencies can be better learned at the beginning of training. All other bias,
the cell as well as hidden states of LSTMs in our work are initialized at 0. Adam
[9] is used as the optimization algorithm and the mini-batch size is 128. The
−5. After each epoch, we shuﬄe the training data to
learning rate is set to be 1e
make diﬀerent mini-batches.

4.5 Comparison with Baselines

Table 2 shows the experimental results of our model and the baseline models.
Based on these results, we have the following ﬁndings:

(1) If we abandon correlation learning layer, our model will degenerate into a
parallel integration of multiple RNNs, CANEAa. Note that CANEA is much
better than CANEAa, this result proves that the correlation learning layer
plays an important role in our models. Furthermore, CANEAa is far behind
JNE, SNE, ETN and ETNA, because it ignores the informative correlations
among multiple tasks. According to this result, it could be demonstrated that
capturing such correlations has great signiﬁcance in multi-task prediction.
(2) As we emphasized in this paper, the ability to learn correlations between
diﬀerent tasks is important in multi-task learning. JNE, SNE, ETN and
ETNA use the shared embedding that implicitly leverage these correlations,
but ignore the interferences among multiple tasks. We ﬁrst use the separated
embedding to avoid such interference, and then employ the correlation learn-
ing to obtain the correlations. Although we use the most simple architectures
of our models for baseline comparison (see Sect. 4.4), which still outperform
all the baselines with a signiﬁcant gap.

(3) The attention mechanism is helpful for separation embedding. As shown in
Table 2, the CANEA is obviously better than the CANEAb. As aforemen-
tioned, they have the similar architecture, except that the former model
introduces the attention mechanism into separated Embedding layer to

866

Y. Jiang et al.

weaken unimportant factors and highlight the important factors of the input.
The results are a strong proof that the step count records of diﬀerent days
in week play diﬀerential roles in gender and age prediction.

4.6 Visualization of Attention

To further analyze the eﬀectiveness of attention mechanism in separated embed-
ding layer, we provide visualization of attention scores. We pick example that
provide insights for users’ pedometer records from Sunday to Saturday during
10 weeks with the average attention scores in each task. Based on the attention
scores from our model, we draw heatmap in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Comparison of attention weights calculated by separated embedding layer.

Noting that Saturday and Sunday obtain highest attention in gender predic-
tion task. Exactly, in our intuition, women prefer to go shopping on the weekends,
which ﬁts the gap between male and female in Fig. 5-(Gender).

Fig. 5. Mean value (y-axis) of attention scores from Sunday to Saturday (x-axis).

For age prediction, our model give relatively higher attention scores to week-
days but lower scores to weekends. Intuitively, young people are more energetic
and active, and most adults tend to stay at their desks on weekdays. But on
the weekends, parents and children may go out to play together. Figure 5-(Age)
empirically demonstrates the reasonability of this intuition from a statistical
point of view, as the gap between adult and young is relatively large on week-
days but small on the weekends.

Multiple Demographic Attributes Prediction in Mobile and Sensor Devices

867

4.7 Experiments on Transaction Data

We also conduct experiments on transaction dataset used in [8]. This dataset
is the ﬁrst public dataset containing both transaction records and demographic
information. It consists of purchasing histories of 56,028 users and contains the
gender, age, and marital status of all the users. And this dataset support two
types of diﬀerent prediction applications: partial label prediction and new user
prediction. Table 3 reports the experimental results. Results show that CANEA
also outperforms all baseline models with impressive improvement on transaction
data, which also proves the strong generalization ability of our model.

Table 3. Results on transaction data.

Model name Partial label

New user

POP

JNE

SNE

ETN

wP

wR

wF1 wP

wR

wF1

0.289

0.514

0.370

0.086

0.294

0.134

0.518

0.563

0.539

0.321

0.348

0.334

0.521

0.563

0.542

0.295

0.351

0.321

0.540

0.576

0.557

0.310

0.368

0.336

ETNA

0.554

0.584

0.569

0.339

0.382

0.360

CANEA

0.568 0.596 0.582 0.356 0.401 0.377

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we introduce the Correlation-Aware Neural Embedding with
Attention (CANEA) model for demographic prediction. Diﬀerent from previous
method using shared embedding to retain hidden correlations between multiple
tasks, our approach leverages separated embedding to eliminate the interferences
between multiple tasks and then propose correlation learning to obtain the corre-
lations between multiple tasks. Furthermore, we further analyze diﬀerent eﬀects
on gender and age prediction of diﬀerent days in week, and take advantage of
this phenomenon to optimize our model.

In the future, we would like to verify the eﬀectiveness of our approach in a
larger number of tasks, which need more annotations. More advanced models
are expected as some shortcomings are still existed in current methods, such as
lack of external knowledge and excessive reliance on large amounts of training
data.

